---
title: Touch-typing
---

I have suffered a known existential crisis this December.
It was mostly due to my disappointment with my Haskell skills, not being
able to represent abstractions in a sufficiently polymorphic and
refactorable way (yet tightly enough to benefit from using type system).

However, it was coupled with general feel of disappointment in myself -
from lack of skill in playing StarCraft, to, well, not able to type with
nine-ten fingers, using only five-seven (on a good day).

This discovery correlates, yet is not caused by the fact that I have
recently obtained my first mechanical keyboard. I have decided to check
if I know how to type after I have followed a link from an old
(classical - ?) blog-post, referenced recently on Twitter by Chris
Allen, called "Teach, Don't Tell". The name of this article was pretty
pretentious, it was called "Programming Dirtiest Little Secret", or some
such.

This blog post states, that one of the most important, or rather,
fundamental skills a computer programmer can have is touch-typing. Go
ahead and read it. It's a funny little rant.

That reminds me of a recent meeting I had with one of my employees. I
thanked him for the hard and productive work and said that I was fairly
impressed with the pace the project develops. To what he answered
something along the lines of "Well, it's my other colleague's effort,
really. While I think about approaches to learn that some of those will
never work, he tries things out with code, makes improvements and come
up with solutions as good as mine, but faster." Needless to say that
that last colleague of ours has a very high MMR in DotA and amazing
typing mechanics. I wonder how much of that has to do with him being
amazing programmer.

So I, naturally striving for best in my life, have decided to pick
touch-typing as well. For one, because I find it humiliating for a
computer programmer or a businessman to be suboptimal about things
(especially things they do daily). If another reason is needed, the guy
with the rant-blog said that it's going to be easy, so why not.

My initial approach, the one that I took yesterday was to spin up good
old GNU Typist and start meticulously doing exercises, one by one.

I find the tutor-ish style of gtypist most friendly and fun, however I
find the lack of real-world typing mode (where backspace allows you to
fix a mistake) most disturbing. See, if I miss a key, especially in the
beginning of studying touch-typing, that means that I have a trouble
with locating this key on the keyboard because of unusual finger
placement. What's a better way to force me to learn the position of this
key and which finger is responsible for pressing it except for forcing
me to go back for a couple of letters in order to try to press the same
letter again. If I am to fail, then again. Over and over till I learn
its position.

This is why I have decided to force myself to write texts by
touch-typing and this one, as you might guess, is the first one of
those.

I think that by combining knowledge about the culture of typing,
exercises from gtypist, and writing texts using Backspace key
frequently, I will get from 30-40 WPM I have since I switched to
touch-typing to the old 60-70 WPM in a week or so.

Till then, I'll tank the damage of severely increased text-writing
times, which will include not only blog posts or personal notes, but
also business e-mails and such.

I'm not sad. I embrace the failure. And so should you.

---

Dec 30th, 2015
