---
title: On Star Wars Episode VII
---

# I did not get "Star Wars: Episode VII" till I wrote this post

This blog post contains spoilers of Star Wars: Episode VII.

This blog post is written after only one seeing of the film. I intend to
read the novelization, watch the movie a couple more times and update
this post accordingly.


```

* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *


* * *

```

Back in 2011, when I was reading the numerous rumors about work on
Episode VII happening within Lucas Film I, much like many other nerds
was not believing it.  Lucas swore that the movies are going to end at
VI, didn't he? There was a plenty of "passive revenue" from selling
licenses to other authors and accompanying works in the canon of
Expanded Universe, wasn't there?

Besides, I, as many other nerds, wasn't particularly impressed with the
editor's work on Episodes I-III, after the second episode I was almost
praying for Lucas Film to make another person, not Lucas, the editor of
the third episode.

So even though the storm was gathering, the news of the end of October
2012 struck like a lightning out of a blue sky. My initial feeling was
denial. I have immediately messaged a friend of mine, Michelle, who is a
huge Star Wars geek as well, querying if she is to watch the movie once
it's out, she said something like "Why, of course!". That sort of
forced me to end rebuttal and to face the fact that I *will* watch this
movie.

My prejudice was coming in waves: I was thinking how good can it be if
done properly, how Expanded Universe can get incorporated into the new
trilogy (oh how foolish I was to think it will be going to be a new
trilogy). I was thinking about how terrible the movie will be if they
will market the shit out of it. New movies clearly won't have any reason
to be created except for marketing and making money. They might turn out
good or even amazing, but the sole consideration is profits, not high
ideals. If profits go down, they will Firefly the franchise. Indeed,
Lucas started writing the story of Episode VII to increase the price of
Lucas Film, and what to say about what Disney does to franchises (can
you tell X-Men movies from one another? Spider-Man?  Really? I don't
believe you if you said "yes" to this). So my hope for new Star Wars
movie to be an artwork, in purest sense of art, in the same way Episode
IV was a piece of an art, was very childish and fragile.

But those were only feelings. Those came in waves, negating each other.
Long before the movie was released. 

Days before the premiere I didn't feel the same hype I
felt days before Episode III, or even Episode II. I didn't want to go
and I knew I had to. I  was very-very confused and anxious.

Yesterday, on new year's eve, a chaotic decision has been made to go and
watch it finally. Here is how I have approached watching it:

I have cleared my mind and promised myself three things:

 1. I will be ruthless to marketing bullshit
 2. I will not let nostalgia have me
 3. I will do my best to watch this movie as "a movie", not as "Star
    Wars".

Maybe it was wiser to just to give in to the Marketing Side of the Force
and enjoy the show, but I conditioned myself akin to a Bene Gesserit
sister.

After the movie was over I asked myself "How it was? Did I like it?"
and to my despair, I couldn't answer this question. Big picture, I was
smiling and pretty happy with the movie. It did not suck. It was a good
movie. It is good by itself. Whenever anyone says that it is a poor,
bottom-shelf Sci-Fi, they should get a fucking pill of anti-hypocricine.
They are asking me to pretend that there was no Star Wars Universe in
the first place and try to perceive the movie as a separate movie and
telling me that it's low quality. Well, let's think about it.

The movie has obviously a vast mythology underneath and telling us how
heroes of the Past, warriors of the old days are giving place to those
who will fight everlasting battle against Evil today and in the future.
Guiding them where they can. On a side note: that is something yet
unseen in the Star Wars movies, at least not like this, not through
continuous interaction between new characters and the characters of the
Past, not on the canvas of *one* movie. Observe: 

 - Episode IV takes a narrative leap
 - Obi-Wan, guiding Luke, has his own, detached story line
 - Yoda, later also doesn't really swing his tiny impractical lightsaber
   shoulder-to-shoulder with Luke, the only duels he fights are duel
   with his insanity and shame, and duel over a torch against R2D2.
 - Episode I, and II are, in fact, the closest with teacher-student
   relationship between Qui Gon Jin and Obi-Wan and Obi-Wan and Anakin

The movie has stellar, flawless spaceship
fights, has a touch of medieval nobleness with all the shining swords;
maybe even appeals to the story of the round table? (Remember, in our
thought-experiment other Star Wars movies don't exist! So, holy shit,
this fresh lightsaber idea is awesome!). This movie asks questions
regarding morality, belief that people change, facing reality over being
drowned in hopes and sorrow of those never coming true. The only flaw of
this movie, really, is that it has too many characters. It's a little
bit hard to follow (especially given that all of them supposedly have a
rich back-story, none of which are revealed to us in its full extent).

So... Sorry, haters, this *is* a good piece of Sci-Fi, *especially* if
you look at it aside from the rest of the movies. If you doubt that,
show it to a kid or someone who haven't seen Star Wars yet and ask them
to review it briefly. If they are at least a little bit into that sort
of fiction, they will like it very much.

Now we know that it is a good movie overall, let's think if it's a good
Star Wars movie?

Let me recall the movie as best as I can and comment on it, keeping in
mind that it is the new beginning for Star Wars, the new hope.

## Opening Crawl

I was very happy to hear the Main Title music and see the classic
opening crawl. It sets the context up. The viewer now know that First
Order inherited the shards of mighty Empire and their primary goal is to
destroy the last (at least somewhat formally) trained Jedi. New Republic
also participates in this race to find Luke to use him in the struggle
against pretty strong armies of united (?) forces of the fallen Empire.

Opening Crawl also is pretty vague about affiliation between the
Resistance and the New Republic. It says that the latter supports the
former. Alright, so far so good, I'm buying it.

Now something that is extremely unclear to me: the existence of an "old
ally" who has discovered a clue to Luke's whereabouts. The clue is a
map. A map, which, how we will get to know at the end of the movie,
complements part of the map that is in memory of R2D2. The map that
leads to the Jedi Temple planet (I don't think it has a name in the
movie). This I don't buy. How did the old man get this map (also, is it
just me or is he cast to resemble Sir Alec Guinness? I bet he'd be happy
about that)? I believe that Luke went to the Jedi Temple planet with R2
on board, when Ben (Kylo) killed the students there, Luke must have
repelled him and sent all the survivors (if any) to hideouts and sent
all the droids (including R2D2) out of the system with instructions to
erase the data about the system from their memories and power down.

But then who and how restored the part of the map? Also, how in the
Galaxy did the First Order obtain information about Poe's mission? I'm
afraid, those questions shall be remained unanswered in films, at least.
I'm really curious about the restoration aspect because it doesn't
really make much sense to me. Maybe the system was re-charted, but then
how was the trajectory of Luke's ship restored? Given that it's the most
important storyline, as far as the opening crawl is concerned, there
could have been more detail and logic to it, I think.

## Attack on the Jakku Village

Remember those mindless drones called Stormtroopers? They are trained to
do just one thing well: shoot with a blaster and miss. Now the beginning
of TFA shows us a different sort of Stormtroopers. They are equipped
with a custom equipment, suitable for "scorched earth" kind of misssion,
they have a clear chain of command, firing teams. Then they show us that
one of them is force-sensitive and, well, has feelings. That's weird
because Stormtroopers were always but mobs, but tokens, but I'm buying
it and I'm happy for diversity in the main character origins (no pun
intended). Force-sensitive part feels a lot weird though. Why didn't
Kylo Ren killed him when he sensed the Force disturbance around him? And
physiologically, are these stormtroopers clones? Are they selected? Are
they taken away from their parents being babies and then zombified? From
what I gather from Phasma's phrase said on the spaceship after attack on
Jakku, they should be if not clones then something very similar to it.
But then why did midi-chlorians chose him? It is another weird
inconsistent storyline, from which we can only conclude that the new
Stormtroopers weren't, in fact, clones, they were trained separately or
in small squads and that Kylo Ren wanted to teach FN-2187 the ways of
the Force, exploiting his fear. Again, explanations exist, maybe those
are even presented in the auxiliary literature (I will check it), but
it's very difficult to relax and enjoy the movie while continuously
faced with that sort of puzzles.

The character of Poe is more or less all we want to see from Lawful Good
version of Han Solo, I've got no problems with that.

## The Scavenger

No problems, really, J.J. Abrams knows how to recreate Tatooine. I love
Ray character, having some problems with how the authors of the movie
portray her as a know-it-all Hermione Granger out of the blue, but that
will go later on. Beautiful and majestic ruins of an orbital battle with
people salvaging wrecks for food makes for an amazing contrast and
brings up the topics of military budget planning of countries and social
inequality.

## I Can Fly Anything

The scene of escape from the star destroyer is reasonable. Really, there
are no problems with it. I'm not sure how well does the dialogue between
Phasma and Kylo Ren play with the fact that FN-2187 was escorting an
important prisoner, but given that he was a well-recognized
Stormtrooper amongst his peers and a well-respected one (see Before the
Awakening booklet for a reference), it is likely that he
social-engineered his way to the prisoner pilot.

The fact that he is a skilled and talented trooper also explains the
fact that, not minding his low self-esteem, he managed to pick shooting
on-board weapons of a TIE fighter fast enough.

Poe giving a name to Finn is also cute.

## Rey Meets BB-8

Cute robots are cute, am I right? Rey fell for BB-8's cuteness and
didn't want a perfectly functional droid to be scrapped. She didn't try
to take it for herself, instead she suggests it how to approach
accomplishing its mission of getting to Mos Eisley, ughm, no... "What's
the name" village.

Also, I really loved an alien of the species we see first in the Mos
Eisely Cantina appearing out of the sand and looking at passing BB-8.

## Follow Me (the Hunger) // Fight on Jakku, Finn Meets Rey

Rey decides to guide the robot to the village, why not, she needs to get
there herself anyway. She refuses a lot of food in favour of keeping the
droid alive, that's fine as well, remember, BB-8 is a really-really cute
robot! After Finn meets Rey (the meeting was epic, by the way, loved
everything about the scene, from "Water! Water!", to zapping BB-8. They
make a run from Stormtroopers deployed on Jakku to find a ship and
escape the mess.

## Falcon

There was no surprise that the ship which is referenced as "garbage" or
some such was the Millennium Falcon. When we see a parked Millenium
Falcon we aren't surprised, even though JJ tried his best to surprise us
with this scene.

I didn't quite get the idea behind the poisonous gas filling the
interior of the Falcon, but from what I gathered, Rey fixed it with a
roll of yellow duct-tape. Some things are the same. I bet on-board
computer is programmed in an ancient dialect of Perl.

Then they get tractor-beamed to some ship, Finn, out of fear assumes
that it's First Order who got them, but we, again, understand that on
meta-level, it's a perfect time for Captain Solo to reunite with his
ship again.

The story is predictable but slick. Bought.

## Chewie, We're Home

Nerds had to tear up here, right? But because it all was so railed and
unavoidable from the standpoint of storyline (and maybe because of my
anti-nostalgic shield which was up), I didn't feel much of anything
here. I was happy to see Han Solo and Chewbacca, I can't deny that.

Now here's the know-it-all portrayal of Rey that I have a large problem
with. THERE IS MORE THAN ONE WAY TO SHOW THAT SOMEONE POSSESSES DEEP
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT A SUBJECT! However, the authors of the movie decided to
hammer the image of Rey being a know-it-all by forcing her saying the
same phrases Han Solo says at the very same time. Amazing! For a
high-school comedy film. This scene was a pretty sad display of "We gave
only this much fucks about the dialogues in the movie".

This scene transitions into "The Ranthars!" scene which, aside from
weird-as-fuck and out-of-place British accent and some Japanese mafia
guys (was I the only one who thinks that a scene like this would me more
appropriate in Pam's story line in Archer series?) is okay.

What I'm not buying is that Ranthar who captured Finn changing the
hunting / defensive strategy all of the sudden, dragging ex-Stormtrooper
across an unfamiliar ship to get killed with a door. But hey, Finn is
Force-sensitive, maybe he used the Force there or something. You know
how it goes, if we have Magic in our Universe, we can use it to account
for scrapy stories and scenes.

## Maz's Counsel

So let's now talk about New Yoda: Maz Kanata. She is Force-sensitive,
she covers smugglers, being, as it seems, a non-violent dissident
alright. She's surrounded with both Empire spies and New Republic spies.
Who does background checks when you run such a watering hole? Okay, it
sounds reasonable.

As the party enters the Castle we get to the all-so-familiar Stat Wars
cantina. I don't remember this scene well because I was looking at the
screen and my mind was playing the beginning of New Hope. It should be
noted, however, that I deeply appreciate the fact that JJ and crew
re-used a ton of McQuire's work that didn't get to be implemented in the
original trilogy.

## The Starkiller

Yay, death star! Bigger, scarier, drawing energy from a star, warping
energy on higher-than-light speed through the Galaxy, destroying entire
systems. People think that it's an overstretch, but I don't give a fuck
about their opinion. It's bad-ass.

The problem I have with the scene of blowing up entire star system as
portrayed was, well, that it felt a tad too casual. It's impossible to
portray an event like this better, I guess, as nobody knew what was
coming their way, but then hey, we could, as film authors make the
mechanics of Starkiller a little bit different. Say, a small fleet of
destroyer-class ships has to warp into the system, install a beacon of a
sort, through which the warped mass of energy would be channeled,
refocused and split across the planets. Then we could have portrayed a
scene of a skirmish of slow-to-react New Republic fleet, realization
of the role of the refocusing sub-system, panic on the planets of the
New Republic system, vain attempts to escape (or maybe some of them
not-so-vain ?!). This thing here is *important* *as* *fuck*. We know
that it will get destroyed by the end of the movie (but what if not,
lol? PLOT TWIST. Nah, this is a no-plot-twist area), however narratively
it is the most devastating, terrible thing happened in the entire movie,
a huge win for the First Order, a huge blow to credibility of the New
Republic.

Also, I find it odd that while the Resistance knew about the Starkiller,
even had it's principle schematics (they weren't delivered by neither
Finn, nor someone else, I believe that they had those the entire time),
they didn't reveal the danger of this station. I'm not sure if I
understood the movie correctly on this point, but I do think that Finn
provided but the very generic yet essential information, such as, well,
the location of the Starkiller and on-site navigation.

Errata: according to the storyline, it seems that Resistance engineers
reverse-engineered the Starkiller design from Finn's words, who was,
like Roger Wilco, a space janitor (kudos for that, JJ). Then they
guessed that there should be a containment field oscillator and Finn
pointed out where it is. Uh, these troopers (ok, prodigal ones) know and
overhear a lot of stuff, don't they? Opsec, First Order! Opsec!

But let's go back to the Stormtroopers appearing at Maz's castle and
what happens next.

## Kylo Ren Arrives at the Battle (Party Splits Up)

So the party goes to Maz for a clean ship, get spotted by both First
Order and Resistance spies (which makes me wonder if that was that good
of an idea in the first place). Kylo appears there to fetch the droid
he's looking for himself.

In the meantime Rey see Force-induced visions (hello, Dark Side Passage)
and flees those. She says that she needs to go home, then Maz advices
her not to do so, after that she snaps out and literally runs onwards,
and onwards, and onwards, till she got caught by Kylo Ren.

Ok. I mean. I'd buy it. It's what a person who is overwhelmed with all
the craziness that's going on would do. That shatter feminist propaganda
opinion (which is bullshit anyway. We always had girl-power tone to the movies.
Leia, Padme, Rey). This doesn't show Rey as an uber-human super-rational
woman who can singlehandedly save the Universe. She's strong, she's
quick, she is independent, but she fucks up big time just as anybody
else.

## The Abduction

Kylo Ren has problems with self-esteem. He overestimates his power to
break other Force-user's mental shields, he underestimates his general
abilities, always seeking for a consolation talking to the mask of his
grandfather, he overestimates his strategic and tactical abilities (or
else the abduction would have been a stellar success!).

With not enough practice of high-profile operations involving
Force-users he screws up and lets Rey slip with her newly-discovered
abilities.

## Han and Leia

They meet after a long time not seeing each other due to Han's "business
trips" and General Organa's occupation with Resistance organization. And
they look at each other. Actually, I find this scene pretty good. I'm
not sure we wanted to see C3PO there but hey, with complete and utter
lack of Jar-Jar Binks and other ewoks, and C3PO being canonically
annoying, we can excuse the ruined moment.

Here Finn leaks the information he has about the new station and
Resistance engineers reverse the station from it. Not impressed, but ok.
(See above).

## Snoke

Classical Star Wars cliffhanger. Who the fuck is it? We can only guess.

## On the Inside / Torn Apart / Ending

Regarding events that led to the final part of the movie. It was pretty
damn sad. It was all pretty good though. It also explained the
limitations of Starkiller's power, which was the right thing to do.
Without it, I would question Republic's decision not to participate in
the arms race against the First Order.

But then, again, the map. I don't get it. Why didn't R2 show it to BB-8
immediately when they talked?  Who and how did convince R2 to do that
finally? We don't know.

How the hell did the old man who looked like Sir Alec Guinness get his
hands on the map of the system with *navigation data*?

If the destination of this navigation data was the same Jedi Temple
planet where Luke was training new generation of Jedis and where Ben
(Kylo Ren's real name) was training then why can't Kylo Ren navigate by
memory / from logs of some of his old astrodroids? Sudden amnesia?

# Conclusion

All things considered, this movie is a good movie. Any Star Wars nerd
should watch it. It is not art, but neither are 99% of Hollywood movies.

To me, after a day of thinking about it, and analysing my first seeing
of it, it falls somewhere between a great fan-fic and a long-long-long
trailer for better movies to come. It is a trailer in a sense that it
doesn't tell a whole lot of story and the story it tells, is pretty
rough around the corners. The iconic sides of Star Wars are very
reasonably and carefully maintained:

 - Spaceship skirmishes make more tactical sense than in the classical
   trilogy
 - Lightsaber duels are not overused which is extremely pleasing
 - Random weird creatures, different beautiful planets, McQuarriesque
   settings we love

I'm looking forward to watching the movie again, solving the storyline
conundrums and then waiting patiently for Episode VIII.

Considering merchandise and auxiliary works: I used to hate the fact that
they threw away Expanded Universe. I don't think that it's that bad
after all.  Remember, for every great Star Wars novel which was a part
of EU we had a couple of not-so-good ones! Besides, consider this - if
you are as hardcore Star Wars fan as me, remember the thrill of
purchasing a new book, especially as a kid, remember the thrill of
writing your own stories that go hand in hand with the stories you have
read which have the blessing of Lucas Films and playing them with Star
Wars d20 or another table top role playing system (if that is your cup
of tea).  Much like technical debt in programming, writing a
single-sharded story with shared timeline while having different quality
of material yields the effect of adding a new story getting
incrementally harder. Thus, a reset helps authors and Disney be more
free in their expansion of the Universe, it increases the value of my
collection of classical Expanded Universe books because all of those are
so out of print by now, it's not even funny, it also allows the next
generation of nerds to have something Star Wars-related to collect, read
and discuss while waiting for the next episode.

A Star Wars nerd must have the deepest commitment, the most serious
mind. This one a long time have I watched. All his life has he looked
away, to the future, to the horizon. Never his mind on where he was.
Hrr. What he was doing. Hrr. To movies going just for fun. Heh.
Excitement. Heh. A Star Wars nerd craves not these things.
